Hey everyone!
Before we start the video I just
wanted to thank everyone whose contributed
to the Telos Pictures IndieGoGo campaign.
If you don’t know Telos Pictures is a production
company myself and a group of other LGBTQ artists
are creating to produce high quality LGBTQ
movies and series made for LGBTQ people. No
gay best friends, no coming out stories,
no “the queer dies at the end” stories.
If you want more info, I’ve left a link to
the campaign in the description of this video.
Since this is the last video I’ll be releasing
before the end of the campaign I just wanted to
get it out there one more time. Okay.
Now on to our feature presentation.
I’ve always found it interesting that economically
disenfranchised people, also known as poor people
when you’re not trying to make it sound better,
have a very love-hate relationship with the rich.
You’d think it would be pure hate, seeing as how
the rich tend to use the poor in any number of
horrible ways. But there is an odd attraction
to the rich set, especially the filthy rich.
When it comes to media we’re not that interested
in seeing those who describe themselves as
comfortable or upper middle class. Because
those people, who tend to make high six to
low seven figure salaries a year,
know how to keep themselves hidden.
They don’t flaunt their wealth in ways that
stand out from anyone else in a gated suburb.
Two cars, maybe? Perfect green
lawn? Pool in the backyard?
Nothing too extraordinary. Nothing
worth making a tv show about, at least.
But the filthy rich, well, they just can’t
help but broadcast how much money they’ve got.
Yachts, multiple houses, fancy cars, diamond
engagement rings the size of the hope diamond.
Trips to space.
When you’ve got it, flaunt it! Right?
And we poors and working class folks
find that fascinating, I think.
At least I do. That the richest of the rich
feel so comfortable that they can’t imagine
something like a, say, French Revolution
happening. We wouldn’t even need to research
who to take to the gallows, they literally
publish their wealth on an annual basis.
And I think they feel this safety
because they feel us lower classes
fawning over them in fictional media.
Prime time soaps of the 1980s like Dallas,
Dynasty, and Falcon Crest. Teen dramas
like Gossip Girl. Outlandishly best
selling novels like those written
by Danielle Steele and Kevin Kwan.
We eat up the lifestyles of the rich and famous,
and I think that gives them a sense of security.
Because this media shows them as rich, yes,
but also fallible. They’re stressed out,
emotionally unstable, and unable to keep their
lives together. Just like us. So this media shows
us that, but for a few extra zeroes at the end of
their bank balances, we’re no different, really.
But lately that addiction to watching
the rich has mostly dissipated.
The Real Housewives of insert city here are still
fabulously popular, or infamous, but media about
rich people isn’t nearly as ubiquitous as it
once was. Except for shows like Billions and
Succession or movies like The Wolf of Wall Street
where the rich are absolutely not good people.
But there does seem to be a caveat to that.
We do still love watching media about the rich
if they aren’t just rich… but royal.
The Crown is a good example. But I’m
not here to talk about Queen Elizabeth
and what that family did to Diana.
I’m here to talk about a little
Netflix show called Young Royals.
Young Royals is a Netflix drama series
focusing on Prince Willhelm of Sweden,
the younger of two royal sons. After a video
tape of him getting into a scuffle in a club
goes viral, the Royal Family is keen to
paint him as an out-of-control delinquent
who needs to get shipped off to
the country for boarding school.
So, off to Hilerska boarding school
he goes… like it’s a prison sentence.
His brother, the crown prince pulls
up in a Ferrari to see him off. We,
the audience, are dragged through
Willhelm’s discomfort as he poses
for photo ops and is greeted
by the entire school staff.
It’s clear that Willhelm
doesn’t like being on camera.
He doesn’t like performing, and he doesn’t
like the posturing required of the monarchy.
The pomp and circumstance grates against his
authenticity. The ‘royal life’ is already in
opposition to who he is and how he wants
to express himself in the first episode.
He’s not like other Royals.
The storm clouds raining
on his parade part briefly
when the school rolls out
a… choir… for his arrival.
OH THE HORRORS OF BIRTHRIGHT.
And it’s love at first sight when
Willhelm lays eyes on Simon, who,
as the soloist, enchants Willhelm.
And who would not be enchanted?
The majority of the show focuses around Willhelm
and Simon, and the development of their teenage
courtship. In spite of the whole… love at first
sight thing — I have to say I really appreciate
how earnest the show is in it’s depiction of
teenage gay boys trying to figure out how to
make this whole ‘relationship’ thing work.
Nothing is particularly sensationalised.
Instead you have two awkward kids with
hormones pouring out of their ears
trying really hard not to stare at each other.
Problem: Simon is not rich. In fact, Simon
is depicted as perhaps on the poor side
of middle class. He and his sister are
attending Hilerska through scholarships
and are not boarding at the school, but
instead have to bus to and from every day.
Especially with Simon, there is a heap of
friction between him and the other boys at school,
who come from money. And by ‘come
from money’ I mean — getting together,
bragging about how much land their
family estates have and popping pills.
Through the duration of this first season,
we see the struggles Willhelm and Simon
face as they try to express their feelings
for eachother. And at almost every turn,
Willhelm feels like his Royal responsibilities
prevent him and Simon from being together.
Which results in, about twice per episode, Wilhelm
flip-flopping back and forth on whether he wants
to be with Simon. “Oh I like you,” but “oh I need
you to delete my number,” but “oh hey you should
spend the weekend with me.” I mean who doesn’t
want to be pursued by a handsome prince, but this
boy is waving heart-shaped red flags in Simon’s
face like it’s valentine's day for the indecisive.
And it’s definitely clear that the
show wants to use this ‘two worlds
collide’ romance in order to open a
discussion about wealth inequality,
but there’s very little in
the way of worlds colliding.
Granted, it IS nice that
you don’t have a rich person
staring down their nose at the poor
and asking: “what’s a microwave?”
Though the show does go out of its way
to describe SOME kind of class dynamic,
at times heavy-handedly, I feel like this
is more out of a sense of obligation.
You have a literal love-at-first sight fairytale,
a kind of queer adaptation of Cinderella.
And If you want to write that in this day and age,
there is going to be a question about the
wealth discrepancy hanging over the plot.
But aside from the lack of fancy food,
which bothers Simon’s sister Sara to no end,
the poors don’t really have to face
a whole lot of struggles from their
economic situation. We know Simon’s family is
struggling, but we don’t know to what extent.
Actually, while we may see the
poors struggle because they’re poor,
we only really see the riches
suffer… because they’re rich.
…Hear me out.
As the show primarily follows Willhelm’s POV,
we, the audience, are most empathetically
drawn to his emotional development.
His drama seems to arise from all of the ways
that being a royal is an obstacle. With the
exception of the death of his brother, his
suffering is almost entirely linked to him
being wealthy. The show goes to great lengths
to describe how and why we should empathise,
maybe even pity this literal
prince, BECAUSE he’s a prince.
From the very clear neglect and distance he
feels from his parents, the strain of having
to do things he does not want to do, struggling
to keep what he wants at arms’ length because
he knows he will not be allowed to have it, to
being manipulated and hazed by other rich boys.
Hazing is illegal for a lot of reasons, due in
part to the fact that — at best — they are non
consensual rituals of humiliation and establishing
power structures. Or as some would say
‘boys being boys.’
And while Willhelm does not consent
to this, within the first episode,
it’s made very clear that he would not be
in this situation if he were not wealthy.
And while the overall plot of the
show is weaved together out of a
number of other issues affecting
the other principal characters,
Willhelm’s emotional state is always brought
to the forefront. From what I can tell,
it seems as if the show is making the
statement that Willhem’s stunted emotional
growth is due specifically to his birthright
and responsibilities as a Prince of Sweden.
It is, after all, the crown that prevents him
from living as he choses. It is the crown which
forces him into this school. And then it
is the crown that forces him to publicly
deny the existence of a relationship with
Simon, even after a sex tape is leaked.
If only there was a poor who could
understand… an emotional support poor if
you will… who could help him find a reason
to sort through all of his emotional BS.
Does Simon have his crap together…? I mean
honestly, he has the emotional intelligence
to spot red flags and put distance
between him and someone he slept with so…
that’s already leagues ahead
of most teenagers. And me.
Simon’s conflict doesn’t really stem from
his own emotional ties — he struggles with
Willhelm’s emotions. But his role, as this is
fiction crafted by authors who have intent,
is to look cute and benefit
from Willhelm's emotional state.
I wasn’t being flippant when I said that this
was a Cinderella story, it’s just flipped almost
entirely in the opposite direction. The Cinderella
figure is Willhelm, who longs to escape his world
of fabulous wealth, and you have Simon, who is the
escape from that rigid and emotionally negligent
world. Simon is the pauper prince charming in this
version of the fairytail, not the prince himself.
Wilmhelm has money, but in order for
him to become a functioning human being,
he needs someone to help him navigate all
the emotions he’s not allowed to have.
Enter the poor person, for whom
emotional intelligence is in abundance.
Simon’s family life is almost a
night-and-day foil to Willhelm.
Little in the way of expendable income,
but wealth in emotions, and having an open,
honest line of dialogue with his mother. She loves
him, cares about him, and wants him to be happy.
His gayness is never an issue with her because
her son’s emotions, his happiness, come first.
Simon has the only thing money can’t buy — a good
home. So if emotions are money, it’s Simon who is
the emotionally liberated prince who
needs to sweep Willhelm off HIS feet.
One may say that this is an interesting flip…
But in Wealth-centric propaganda fiction,
the glorification of poverty isn’t exactly
new. And based on how successful it is, I
can’t see it going away any time soon. We
see a lot of media popping up about how hard
it is to be wealthy, and especially Royal.
How the responsibility of privilege weighs
down so much that it crushes the individual.
This is the focus and topic of The Crown.
Taking the royals and showcasing their most
public moments — taking care to explain that
these people WOULD be decent human beings
IF ONLY they did not have so many burdens.
That obligation stifles the ability to be human
and begets more suffering across generations.
There are a number of instances but the
clearest to me is in Season 3 Episode 6,
where Prince Charles is sent to a
school he does not want to go to
so he can fulfil a royal obligation that
his family has arranged against his wishes.
Charles has to spend time with a
LOWLY professor and his family.
At which point the professor’s wife remarks
how sad Charles makes her. How he looks at
them and their child as if he’s never received
so much as a pat on the head from his parents.
Again, reinforcing the concept that the poor have
a greater wealth of authentic life that the rich
could never buy for themselves.
And this media’s message
is that the Rich NEED the poor
to help them sort out their crap.
Look at Crazy Rich Asians, where
the Young family NEEDS a poor woman
to stand up to the bullying family matriarch.
You have a similar setup in Eddie Murphy’s
Coming to America. Or Gone With the Wind, where
a fallen-from-grace plantation owner literally
cannot function on a base human level without
the assistance of a freed slave now-servant.
Hmm. One of those things was not like the others.
Or Downton Abbey which has a VERY optimistic
depiction of how upper-and lower-classes interact,
and is host to any range of emotional support
poors who are there to step in and offer some
advice you can’t buy. In this media the
problem with wealth is that the riches
have forgotten to respect and value
what services the poor can offer them.
Keep in mind, Willhelm’s infatuation with
Simon begins while Simon is literally
singing. The wealthy falling in love with
the poor because of a song, or a poem,
or even natural beauty, is something
media has depicted across time.
On one hand, it is a message
to the rich to value the poor
because talent and merit is something that cannot
be bought. On the other hand, it is a message to
the poor to be as talented as humanly possible
in the hopes of attracting a wealthy patron.
By the way, you should totally sign up for my
Patreon. Where I post exclusive videos, audio
commentaries, behind the scenes videos, and more.
Sign up today at the link in the description.
Media like this frames wealth as a gilded cage.
And while poor people may
not have financial stability,
they are depicted as having a degree of freedom
that is simply not accessible to the wealthy.
I’ve never been wealthy, so I
can’t say if the former is true,
but I can say that depicting poverty
as ‘freedom’ is certainly… a take.
You COULD say a non-royal poor person can kiss
whoever they want without familial consequences
or repercussions. But that is looking at
poverty with very rose-tinted glasses.
In spite of the fact that it was a very
well-crafted show with plenty of good
characters and emotional realism, I did find
Young Royals was a little guilty of this.
If there was more content
about Simon’s social standing,
it didn’t make it into the final cut or it’s
going to be explored in a second season.
Which is happening. Yay!
And of course, carrying on this discourse
framed exclusively around Swedish wage classes,
we’re getting into that nasty territory of saying
“well it’s not as bad as it is
in America, so stop complaining.”
And we’re not gonna do that here!
But it does re-enforce a toxic
romanticization around poverty.
This rich vs. poor depiction goes out
of its way to make poor viewers grateful
that they’re poor. They have something that the
rich will never have, and they/we ought to be
grateful for it. The REAL wealth is the people
you meet along the way, and so on and so forth.
This media tells us that it’s the
poors’ responsibility to keep the
rich grounded and honest. But one
thing this media does not highlight
is that their responsibilities and
reputations, are themselves, privileges.
Even when there’s shame associated with
not quite meeting those expectations.
But shame… is never something the poor can afford.
Shameless was a Showtime television series
that ran for eleven seasons from 2011
to 2021. It followed the story of the Gallaghers,
a family living on the south side of Chicago who,
depending on their current financial
situation, could range from poor to destitute.
Though the main character for the first few season
was inarguably, Fiona (despite what the Emmy
Awards would have you believe) the main romantic
draw of the show was not her on again off again
relationships with multiple men, but the tense
— sometimes hilarious, sometimes heartbreaking
— relationship between her brother Ian, and his
temperamental bossy bottom of a boyfriend, Mickey.
Ian and Mickey are established as enemies early
on in the series but quickly turn into lovers,
because who could resist Cameron
Monaghan? Their relationship is,
economically, one of equals. They both come from
the same economically devastated neighbourhood,
they both grew up with the same
crappy parental situations,
and they both have sisters who deserve
so much more than life is giving them.
The real tension between Ian and Mickey,
early on, is much like the tension between
Willhelm and Simon. Mickey isn’t willing
to come out of the closet to be with Ian.
In fact, when Mickey’s outed he’s forced
into a shotgun wedding to Svetlana,
a bisexual Russian sex worker. In the end though,
they end up in an oddly healthy (at least for
them) relationship. Married and everything.
But their gayness isn’t really where the
drama comes from. It would be untenable
to try to drag out ‘Mickey doesn’t want to
come out’ storylines for eleven seasons.
The real drama comes from the economic situation.
Because of growing up in extreme poverty, Mickey
has become a criminal like his father. Not being
the least bit shy when it comes to brandishing
firearms or breaking into people’s houses.
He does time in jail multiple times throughout the
series, but never comes out any different, really.
Because how could he? He’s been
raised to be a certain way,
and time in a state pen isn’t
going to beat that out of him.
Ian, on the other hand, isn’t
quite the criminal Mickey is.
Nothing beyond the mischief most teenagers
would get up to, for the most part.
Ian just wants to get grades good enough
to join the military. That’s his big dream.
Which he does join, but does so illegally
using his brother’s name and information.
When next we see Ian he’s gone AWOL
from the military and has become a
tweaked out GoGo boy at a gay bar. But
luckily our unlikely prince charming,
Mickey, swings in and rescues him.
But Ian’s acting very strange,
and this erratic behaviour increases while
Mickey's problems with his wife also intensify.
Ian drifts in and out of manic episodes until his
relationship with Mickey is fully confirmed, with
Mickey outing himself at his son’s christening.
The end of the manic episodes leaves Ian in bed,
nearly unresponsive. It’s at this
point that we discover that Ian,
like his mother Monica, has Bipolar Disorder.
My mother also suffered from Bipolar
Disorder so I know that with the right
medication and coping mechanisms, this is
a condition that can be mostly managed.
But there’s a big difference
between Ian and my mother.
Though I also grew up poor, we lived in Canada.
So my mother was able to see the specialists she
needed and get the medication she
needed without us going homeless.
Ian, in Chicago, doesn’t have that luxury.
In fact when the diagnosis is first floated,
Mickey refuses to allow Ian to be helped
because it would, in all likelihood, result in
him being institutionalised in a state mental
health institution. Which, in case you haven’t
heard, aren’t the nicest places. If Ian had the
money to go see the doctors and get the meds
he needed, it would be a different situation.
But everything deteriorates until Ian goes on
a psychological bender, his erratic behaviour
increasing to the point where he agrees to
do unprotected porn, and abducts a baby.
Ending with him forced into a psych ward,
where even Mickey agrees he needs treatment.
Though there are plenty more ups and downs
for Ian and Mickey over the next few seasons,
with both ending up in jail at one point, they
do end up stabilised and happy in the end. But
it takes eleven seasons, a lot of heartache,
law breaking, violence, and trauma to get there.
But even when they do move out of the bad
neighbourhood and into a nice building,
they have no idea how to act in “proper
society”. With the uppity middle class gays
trying to be rich gays. They don’t quite fit
in with the world above the poverty line.
But neither do most of the
people on the show, queer or not.
Fiona, Ian’s big sister and the family
mother figure, hops from odd job to odd job,
even cleaning out clogged sewage
pipes to try and make ends meet.
The spiral of just too many bad days eventually
leads to her becoming an addict. Which,
in turn, leads to the Gallagher family
situation becoming even more precarious.
Once she gets clean, she works her way up to be
the manager of a diner, which growing up poor
seemed like a good solid job. But she soon finds
out that being a manager isn’t all that different
from working a cash register. You just have a
lot more responsibilities and not a lot more pay.
That’s a situation I think a lot
of people have been in. Growing up,
I always thought that “manager” was the top of the
tops. That's the job where you have two cars and
a nice house. Where your kids have a college
fund, etc.. Because what’s above the manager?
But then I actually started working, got myself
into a managerial marketing position and realised…
Oh… Managers are just employees
who are expected to be the bad guy.
The people with real power,
real money, are the owners.
They’re the ones with the nice houses
and the cars and the college funds.
They don’t really teach you
that in high school though.
That no matter how hard you work for a company,
no matter how high you climb in that company,
you’ll always be under somebody else.
Not so different from Young Royals where
no matter what Simon does, no matter what
his family does, they will always, always,
be below Wilhelm. Because they cannot
work their way into the aristocracy.
America doesn’t have royals, but they do have
millionaires and billionaires. You can work
your way into the manager position of a company,
but it's near impossible to work your way into
the CEO position. That glass ceiling is there,
it’s just blocking something other than a crown.
CEO’s are the royalty of America, basically.
And like the royals of other
countries, they are fabulously wealthy
and yet still take state funding through tax
cuts, tax rebates, and government contracts.
At least the Royals of Europe are honest
about it. They just take the money,
they don’t create five layers of separation
so that people think they’re ‘creating jobs.’
I think that might be why Americans romanticise
the royals of Europe so much. They’re not trying
to convince people that they aren’t as rich as
they are. Most of them aren’t pretending that
they’re just like everyone else, a sad performance
Mark Zuckerberg or Bill Gates try to pull off.
REAL royals live in gilded palaces, not
open concept ranch-style homes that just
happen to have a tennis court, two
pools, a personal movie theatre,
and an underground garage with multiple Italian
cars they barely know how to pump gas into.
That might even be why people were attracted to
Donald Trump while he ran for president. He was
rich and made no show of pretending he wasn’t.
Hillary Clinton was filthy rich too, maybe
even richer than Donald Trump if some of his
tax returns are accurate, but she pretended to be
a common person. Just a good ol’ Arkansas girl.
While Trump, though the epitome of everything
that had ruined their lives, didn’t really put on
airs. He bragged about a gold toilet, but people
liked him because he was “telling it like it is.”
And racist, they liked him because he was racist.
But a lot of people were just willing
to look past the racism because he
was a rich who wasn’t putting on a
facade. He wasn’t driving an SUV,
he was driven around in town cars and limos
and private jets. That romanticization of
abundant apparent wealth helped him the
same way it helps the royals of Europe.
It also helps, in my opinion,
that many European countries have strong
social safety nets that America lacks.
Take for instance the depiction of what passes for
impoverished between Shameless and Young Royals.
Simon’s family isn’t rich by any means, but they
do have a house and their mom does have a car.
And whatever job she has, it's enough to keep that
house paid for, keep that car paid for, and give
her enough time in the day to make homemade dinner
for her kids, and their friends a lot of the time.
And as far as Simon’s classmates are concerned,
that basically makes him dirt poor. He’s not,
by any means, but… that’s how he’s seen. Looked
down upon because he doesn’t live on campus.
Meanwhile on Shameless poor is, well, poor. Where
it’s sometimes seven to nine people living in a
house with three bedrooms, one of which seems more
like a storage room. And everyone in the family,
even the kids, need to pool their money
to make sure they can keep the bills paid.
One month on, one month off. This month we pay
the power pill, next month we pay the phone bill.
Get what we can from the food bank, and make
that baby formula last as long as possible.
One mistake. ONE financial venture gone awry,
could send the whole house of cards tumbling
down. What if Debbie can't get any babysitting
jobs? What if Lip cant get any tutoring jobs?
What if Ian lost his job at the corner store? What
if their mostly-absentee alcoholic father Frank
finds the coffee can with the monthly funds
stashed in it and decides to go on a bender?
Destitution. One mistake. One oopsie daisy
and the lives of the whole
family could come crashing down.
While on Young Royals, when Simon demands
August pay him the money he’s owed,
getting even slightly aggressive, his friends
look at him like he’s turned into a monster.
Implying that spending time around
rich people is causing Simon to
absorb money-first values by osmosis. Who’s
there to support the emotional support poor,
when he starts to lose his passive,
resolve-conflict-with-mediation values?
Meanwhile on Shameless
you don’t go demanding money back
without a crew and at least an iron pipe.
So the two shows are very different, with very
different depictions of being gay. But one
thing they DO have in common is that they’re
both, in their most basic forms, tragedies.
Shameless is a tragedy about the poor thinking
they can climb their way out of poverty,
and Young Royals is a tragedy about the rich.
Simon, though he may be the
audience’s cypher character,
is not the tragic figure. Wilhelm
is. Felice is. And, to an extent,
August is. Wilhelm can’t be himself. Feliece
is held to impossible standards by her family.
And August falls from grace when his family can’t
afford to pay his tuition any longer. August still
has the assets that he could liquidate, but
his pigheaded “legacy” thinking won’t let him.
So which is more tragic? The poor being trapped
in a forever-cycle of poverty? Or the rich being
inconvenienced? Well that’s a debate for the ages.
They say a comedy is a play
with a wedding in the final act,
and a tragedy is a play with
a wedding in the second act.
And that’s probably a better rule for tragedy
than whatever Hegel or Aristotle cooked up. Ah,
pathos this, ethos that! Sure, fine. Go on Mary.
Invent a system of logic specifically to justify
why you and your rich friends can’t be bothered
to empathise with plays about poor people.
And no, as much as it may make
for a great cure for insomnia,
we’re not going to summarise Poetics beat by
beat here. And we’re also not going to talk about
Hegel’s thoughts on Tragedy because, though it may
be described as contrasting Aristotle’s theories,
“Contrasting ideas” in philosophy basically
amounts to using the word ‘necessarily’
versus ‘necessarily’ written in italic font.
As far as the language of philosophy is
concerned — it’s a completely different word.
Suffice To say, and this has been
true for the bulk of human history,
the primary focus of tragedy and drama
is upon the struggles of being rich. In
one way or another. This could
be for any number of reasons.
Most likely — the people sponsoring and
attending theatre were people with money.
And they would absolutely like to see
themselves reflected in these characters.
But in Aristotle’s Poetics, he claims
that a necessary component of tragedy is
that the tragic hero must fall from grace.
The thought process here is that if you’re
already at the bottom — there’s nowhere
else to fall. So can it really be tragic?
Tragedy, to Aristotle, had the role
of shaping society through a means
of — and I’m paraphrasing,
here — cautionary parables.
For instance, maybe the world would be a
better place, Mr. Oedipus, if you didn’t
go around the Balkan peninsula and murder
everyone who had road rage as bad as you do.
Things like that.
As most of the ancient world existed
in an openly classist system, it was
more or less seen as the natural order
of things for the poor to be suffering.
And well… things can’t really get any more tragic
if you start out suffering. Or so they thought.
You did have theatrical productions which
would have been called Domestic Tragedies,
focusing on the middle or working classes. But
even these were scoffed at for not having
the gravitas of assassinating a demi-god.
Meanwhile, what’s really going
on is that philosophers were
just salty because the only thing
they were ‘lords’ of was the edge.
It’s not that the wealthy patrons
of theatre didn’t want to know that
poor peoples’ lives were hard. They knew
exactly how they treated their employees.
AND SOMETIMES IN HISTORY CALLING THEM
‘EMPLOYEES’ WOULD BE A VERY, VERY GENEROUS WORD.
It was more that they just didn’t care.
In the wealthy’s own inflated view of
their self-importance, what’s a little
emotional abuse to a couple servants?
Look at me!
How dare you?
Close your eyes!
As for why the wealthy favoured
tragedies over feel-good stories?
Scholars have written at length
about why tragedy is more important,
but it seems like a lot of the arguments
boil down to ‘because I said so,’
or ‘because this old reclusive intellectual
who was alive hundreds of years ago said so.’
This is exclusively a personal observation,
but I find that intellectual-types
tend to glorify dourness. Like they feel like
something is more significant if its depressing.
As if a pessimistic depiction of the
world is automatically more authentic.
I think in many ways, we consider optimism to
be manipulative. That it’s trying to convince
you that the world is inherently good, and
light-hearted. And that we lean towards the belief
that real human nature is rooted in darkness.
Or that optimism is a cover-up for sadness.
So comedy and light-hearted media is
often viewed, now and in the past,
as being frivolous and unimportant. And therefore,
lacking the gravitas that scholars consider
‘authentic’ enough to be important. For evidence
o this, look at the Oscar nominations every year.
Yet comedy is much broader as a theory
than just fart jokes and slapstick.
For example, we wouldn’t necessarily describe
Charles Dickens as ‘comedic.’ HOWEVER,
he did craft his stories around the working class,
and often depicted a lifting of their fortunes.
As with his classics: A Christmas Carol,
Great Expectations, and Hard Times.
Dickens was a fan of ‘bittersweet’
endings, and these stories, at least,
involve the poors being lifted from destitution
and the wealthy having learned a lesson at the
expense of their social standing. It’s comedic
in the sense that it opposes tragedy. Whether
this qualifies these stories as capitol-C ‘Comedy’
would probably vary from one scholar to the next.
Though still, it can be said that Dickens was an
author who wanted to use his platform to outline
that poverty itself is a tragedy. Certainly
not the only one — coming to mind is La Boheme,
in which the starving artists burn
their art to keep warm in the winter.
You could even say that Les Miserables
or the Phantom of the Opera (the novel,
not the Andrew Loydd Webber glorified
theme park attraction) fit the bill,
because they contain a commentary on class
dynamics. Even though the central focus
IS on characters of high social standing
or who reach high social standing.
However, it wasn’t until much later that we
began a critical discourse around poverty
and tragedy in earnest. This was in 1949, with
the Broadway premiere of Death of a Salesman.
And though almost all of us have had to
read it for high school English class,
reception was actually
rather mixed upon its debut.
Some critics felt that it was nothing
more than a promotion of playwright
Aurther Miller’s Marxist leanings. I mean,
apparently giving a rat’s ass about people the
government is stepping on makes you a Marxist.
According to… everyone in American news media.
And maybe it was because of heated ideological
debates and literal wars over political economics
in the first half of the century that this
play really sparked that debate. However,
unlike other tragedies about middle
class and lower class heroes, to whom
tragic events happened, Death of a Salesman’s
narrative treats poverty itself as the tragedy.
American poverty, specifically, as it exists
in a culture of greed, envy, and desperation.
Tragedy did, however, lose its popularity.
As theatre became more and more populace,
and especially as movies came to dominate popular
entertainment. Audiences who hadn’t read Aristotle
really weren’t that interested in sad endings. Or
at least the definition of a tragedy has broadened
to the point where you don’t need a bunch
of rich people causing problems on purpose.
Many of the same principles of Tragedy
are simply what is found in the genre of
‘Drama’ as a whole. In fact, tragic
events are usually used to advance
the plot and generate friction
for the characters in most media.
And it’s in this very roundabout
way that, for the sake of argument,
I’m perfectly willing to qualify both
Shameless and Young Royals as tragedies.
If Aristotle can use ‘logic’ to
make exceptions for things he likes,
and find ways to justify them
academically, then so can I!
“Oh, well James, you can’t do that! Aristotle
was one of the greatest minds in human history.”
Yeah, only because his friends said so!
You know what Aristotle didn’t know?
That the mitochondria is the ‘power
plant of the cell.’ See? Smarts.
The difficulty with analysing modern media
on the basis of comedy vs. tragedy is that
almost universally, authors (and creators of all
types of media) like to incorporate elements of
both for a single work. You usually get a bit
of dramatic tension in comedies, and you’re
likely to get someone cracking a joke or two
so that characters seem more human in a drama.
Tried and true ‘the hero dies’
tragedies are very uncommon today
because audiences generally don’t like investing
in media to have their hearts ripped out.
But we can look at this media, and
gauge the overall feelings that this
media is trying to project. In
either case, we, the audience,
are meant to see the themes of suffering and
hardship that these characters are undergoing.
Shameless absolutely fits a more Miller-esque
tragic sense. And though tragic it may be,
there are moments where struggles
and obstacles are played for laughs.
This is because it is not the individual
instances of characters failing
that we are meant to see as tragic,
but rather their overall circumstances.
The fact that, though we root for them,
we know they’re doomed to fail because
American wealth is an institution that does
not easily permit those to rise above poverty.
What these characters go through is what many
other American families experience. Even as the
narrative devices in the show make us laugh, we
realise that these are situations that real people
undergo every day. And that if the show treated
every tragedy as sorely as it is in real life,
that would feed into the sense of
inescapability that many people exist in.
As the great Carrie Fisher once said: “If my
life wasn’t funny, it would just be true.”
And there is something to be said about
appreciating the absurdity of a situation
you are in, even while what little you have
built of your life is collapsing around you.
People who exist in poverty are no less
capable of literary analysis than people
of means. Spotting situations where
reality is stranger than fiction may
very well be what keeps a lot of us from
crossing over the point of no return.
However, compare and contrast to
Young Royals, where the tragedy is
rooted in emotional unfulfillment. After
undergoing a degree of emotional growth,
Willhelm decides he’s gonna put his
heart on the line and gets a big old—
Katya: “Party.”
—from his love-interest. Sure it’s not Hamlet,
but for a show that is built around the
soon-to-be-crown-prince’s emotional development,
this is definitely not a happy ending.
And while that may have been the finale, also
keep in mind that Willhelm’s older brother died,
his mother cared more about optics than his
emotional state during a sex-tape scandal,
and that his family in general consistently
betrays and micormanages him. We are given
a very strong feeling that his life is hard.
In fact, when it comes to his
status, wealth, and titles,
he has to be reminded by his mother that
this is not a burden, it is a privilege.
And this is where an analysis of
Young Royals really gets interesting.
Because Young Royals can fit very nicely
into that Aristotelian sense of tragedy.
As the peak of dramatic tension is built
around Simon’s lukewarm rejection of Willhelm,
we can see that, throughout the plot, Willhelm has
played an abundant role in earning that tragedy.
Go back to grade 9 English where we
talk about a tragic hero’s ‘turning
point’ — but where your English teacher
never explained why that was significant.
In theatrical tragedy, the hero must
do something that makes the tragedy
inevitable. They have to actively make a decision
that leads to bad stuff happening to them.
This is absent from Miller’s sense of tragedy,
as in that case, the tragic elements
will occur regardless of the hero’s
actions — which itself is the real tragedy:
a lack of control over one's circumstances.
The real tragedy in Willhelm’s life is
one that he does not have control over:
the death of his brother. Everything else:
ranging from education to boy problems are
caused by his behaviour or lack of behaviour.
In the case of Simon, this is abundantly clear.
He spent the whole season jerking this boy
around, which Simon was very forgiving of because…
you’re a gay teenager in a place where you
feel you don’t belong. You are naturally
going to forgive a lot of crappy behaviour
because someone’s paying attention to you.
A nice touch of realism that I really appreciated.
But the bridge too far for Simon was Willhelm’s
public denouncement of their relationship.
Wilhelm was not allowed to be romantically
or sexually involved with another man.
And so instead of standing up
for himself against his family,
Willhelm baulked, and agreed
to keep the love affair secret.
And from Simon’s perspective: it’s hard for
something to feel like ‘love’ if the other person
keeps you hidden. And I will reiterate a point
from previous videos that ‘forbidden love’ is not
nearly as glamorous as romance authors will
have you think. That kinda stuff gets real
toxic real fast, and leads to very
nasty psychological developments.
There’s a reason why queer folk have
been fighting for an end to closets.
Willhelm’s turning point, as it were, was choosing
the crown’s responsibilities over Simon. And while
yes, you shouldn’t put all your eggs in one basket
as a teenager, it’s a bit of a kick in the balls
when someone else thinks that they’re going to
have the best of both worlds at your expense.
Simon, as it happens, is openly gay. He
doesn’t seem the slightest bit ashamed by it,
nor is it something that he feels
he ought to hide from anyone.
I can’t imagine he would be comfortable being
in the closet because his boyfriend has to be.
But as this show is framed from Willhelm’s
perspective, and follows Willhelm’s development,
what is that meant to signify? If Willhelm’s
parents are aware that he’s gay (or bi), it
does not seem as if that’s a discussion anyone’s
willing to have. His mother seems ambivalent in
the worst way… where she doesn’t really care
except when it creates a hassle for the Crown.
And then Willhelm is simply
a problem that needs fixing.
And doesn’t that just suck
for Willhelm? Seriously.
His boyfriend can be openly gay, and he seems
to have a greater grasp on his mental health
in spite of aluded childhood trauma. Simon has
more freedom over who he can be friends with,
more personal autonomy, and he
has a say when it comes to family
decisions. His mother can also stomach to
look him in the eye, let alone hug him.
Tallying up the score… Kinda makes you
prefer the idea of being poor. Right?
Like, according to Young Royals, being poor is
kinda great. Much better than being rich where
everyone is trying to exploit you. Because, ah,
poor Willhelm. Caught in the dregs of being young,
wealthy, and fabulously well-to-do.
With his titles and holdings.
He’s so oppressed.
Which is exactly what his emotional support poor
is here to help him through. Saying NO to the man.
And it’s not that I’m particularly holding
this against Young Royals. Like I said,
it’s not alone in the use of an
emotional support poor to help a
rich person screw their head on straight.
And it doesn’t even need to be romantic.
Look at the great personal service
Timon and Pumba offered Simba.
This is a recurring theme in media where
the wealthy and royal require good ol’
poverty values to sort out all of their toxic
behaviour and be more complete human beings. To
reinvigorate their cold, money-obsessed
lives with wholesome personal growth.
Because it’s the wealthy’s feelings we
should care about in this situation.
Sound of Music. My Fair Lady. Gone With the Wind.
Jasmine and Aladdin. Achilles and Patroclus,
if you wanna get gay about it. It’s one of
those fiction rules where when you SEE it,
you can’t stop seeing it.
It gets really bad when you begin to dig into
mythology, where our history of literature really
likes to remind poor people that wealth
leads to a hollow, empty life and that
they should pity the rich. And do as little as
possible to try and become wealthy themselves,
or to revolt against the sad rich people
because their lives are hard enough as it is.
But poverty? That’s where
the real human values are.
It’s even in the bible.
Thank god we have Journey Into the West,
where we have a buddhist monk wandering around
China with his polycule of disgraced furries.
But everyone else is a rich person in need of
the underclass to help them sort out their crap.
Look at Shakespeare!
Scholars have remarked that the separation
between some of Shakespere’s comedies and
his tragedies are divided by the presence of
the quote: ‘wise fool.’ A comedic character
who is able to peer through social pretence and
posturing, to see the real mechanics of what’s
going on. He would steer the characters to the
place they need to be to resolve their conflicts.
In plays where there is no ‘wise fool,’ characters
continue to spiral out of control
and eventually kill each other.
I guess you get to a point of wealth and
importance where basic human emotional
functions just altogether stop. And
you require the services of someone
who needs to spend most of their life fighting
to even eat to remind you what really matters.
Like learning how to spit.
In any case, rich-framed media about the
interactions of the wealthy and the poor
result in a utilitarian study of what
services the poor can offer the rich.
Sometimes even in a literal
context like The King and I,
or Sound of Music. The people who benefit
from this arrangement are always the wealthy.
Keep in mind that Willhelm first falls in
love with Simon — at first sight — when
Simon is offering a service. His voice.
How the poors directly
benefit from this is unclear,
and not always consistent. First, the poor has
to be the one resisting the relationship… for
reasons? And there’s no real pattern about
whether the poor is elevated to live lavishly,
or if the rich sacrifices their
wealth because ‘all you need is love.’
The direction of the plot is
rooted in how the poor belong
with the rich. (Or to the rich.) And there
isn’t usually enough time to describe why
these people belong together. Because if the
poor person doesn’t have their crap together,
and if they’re poor — then they simply don’t
have anything to offer. The arrangement goes:
the rich offer financial stability —
the poor offer emotional stability.
And there IS something obnoxious about telling
people who can’t afford to pay their
bills that all they need is love.
For while we enter a discussion about how the
rich are so stuffy in their responsibilities
and reputations, and how the poors’ role is
to liberate them from those confinements,
we over-inflate the freedom
of poverty, and omit the ways
that a lack of wealth fundamentally
stifles individual freedoms.
The poor, in general, have to dedicate a
lot of their time and energy to not being
destitute. Resulting from that, are a myriad
of physical and psychological health-problems.
Which, either due to working too much to recover
or not being able to see a specialist at all,
means that these issues may not
get resolved in a meaningful way.
It’s unfair to expect the poor to liberate the
rich when the poor cannot liberate themselves.
Being ‘poor’ isn’t ‘free.’
Being poor is expensive.
And being poor does not afford the freedom that
wealth-obsessed fiction indicates that it does.
Rent.
While many, if not most authors did not begin
wealthy, many of the tropes that exist in modern
fiction were developed in a time when in order
to be an author, you needed to be educated.
Which, before education was socialised, was
something you could only get if you were wealthy…
Or if like Dickens’ Pip, you had
a mysteriously wealthy benefactor.
But because these authors were so
disillusioned with their own lives,
they snap-reacted to a
‘grass is greener’ argument.
To the point where you had such and such
Victorian poet musing about how a rambling,
untreated mentally ill homeless man was living
the authentic life, compared to their gilded cage.
Which leads us to media like Shameless. Which
instead of creating a retelling about how
great it is to be poor, actually goes through —
beat by beat — to create a discourse about what
it’s actually like to be poor. And what people
mean by ‘privileged’ when talking about wealth.
Come to think of it, why do we obsess so much over
wealthy people in media as a general rule? We love
rich people being naughty! Dallas, from the 1980s.
Real Housewives and reality television in general.
Even as much as Game of Thrones liked to play
the field when it came to riches and poors, the
second George R.R. Martin was off payroll of
that show, tit shifted to being a glorification
of all the ways that Rich people get to
have choices and poor people die in wars.
…Sam and Gillie. Emotional support poors.
…oh god. Sam and Frodo.
Emotional support poor hobbits.
DOES IT EVER END?
I’m curious to see what everyone
thinks about this. Leave some of
your favourite emotional support
poors in the comments below.
One could say that our
obsession with wealth in media,
and specifically how the riches
are problematically flawed,
comes from a kind of sadistic joy that
these people are more messed up than we are.
“Alexis Carrington-Colby
pushed someone into a pool?
I would never do that! WHY
IS SHE RICH BUT I’M NOT?”
The media reaffirms that our lack of wealth
affords us a sense of dignity and perspective.
We have perspective enough not
to push someone into a pool
or throw a drink at someone
over a perceived slight.
Knowing full well… that this is not the case.
I speak from experience, you’re probably just as
likely to have poor people acting like that too.
It’s not like all the poors are down at
the bottom trying to cooperate. In fact,
especially in areas of scarcity, some poors like
feeling like they’re at the top of a heap. So
they can be a little bit touchy when it comes
to what respect they feel like they’re owed.
A lot of poor people live under the expectation
established by propaganda — that hard work begets
success. And some preemptively model themselves
based on what they believe ‘rich values’ to be.
And place a heightened sense of importance on
reputation and social standing. Specifically
in the event that they may be rich one day, it
would be good to have that sorted out in advance.
I want to specify that I see
this as a problem with society,
and not a problem with any
singular piece of media.
I liked Young Royals. Let’s be clear!
When you’re setting out to make a simple
teenage love story that takes place in a
fancy boarding school, it’s not fair to expect
every piece of media to reinvent the wheel.
So naturally, you are going to lean on some
tropes that have persisted — apparently — since
the dawn of time. Thus, even if you are
making an anti-classist piece of media,
you are leaning on tropes which
are, in turn, rooted in classism.
These tropes treat the poor, even in
media depictions where the rich appear to
value poor people, as a class of people who
exist to provide a service to the wealthy.
And this media in turn, may highlight problems
within wealth, though inevitably depicts the
‘right kind’ of wealth triumphing over the
wrong kind. That there are good riches and bad
riches — and what we have to do is make sure that
the ‘good’ or ‘rightful’ Royals succeed in ruling.
The same is true for American media where there
are ‘good’ capitalists. And the poors’ only role
is to actively support and assist the good ones
in defeating the bad ones. And even if the good
ones fail, they still have their trust fund and
now they have a romance with a once-poor person.
This trope is, of course, a fantasy.
Bagging a rich person who’s going to
take care of you financially, while
you take care of them emotionally,
is more or less like winning the lottery.
But the part that frustrates me is that
even while I’m condemning the use of
emotional support poors in media… don’t
you kinda wish it could happen to you?
To get whisked away from our mundane life
and find ourselves swept into the fast
lane of glamour and opulence? Especially when
there’s a gorgeous royal (literal or figurative)
to hold our hand through it?
But there’s a problem we’re not addressing here.
When it comes to media, in order to analyse it,
we have to ask the tough questions. What is the
author trying to convey about the state of the
world? What is the author saying needs to change?
And quite frankly, I’m
surprised it took Young Royals
for me to realise this. Because looking
back, the writing is on the wall.
Wake up people.
The messaging is obvious. They’ve been
screaming out for thousands of years and
we’ve been too pig-headed to listen. The REAL
victims of wealth inequality… are the rich.
There is a literal never-ending flow of
media-material talking about how miserable the
rich are specifically because they’re rich.
It doesn’t end. They’ve been begging poor
people to save them for so long and now they’re
beginning to realise lifting up one or two poor
people from obscurity to reinvigorate the rich
community’s sense of perspective is not enough.
This can’t be a one-or-two person effort. Charlie
Buckett here, Oliver Twist there. But here we are,
with Rich people still going on about how awful
it is to be wealthy and powerful and important,
and living without a single
care in the world except
for the hollow and empty lives they lead
from the burden of having so much money.
They’re actively asking us to
take their money... All of us.
And it’s going to take all of us. A
real group effort. A communal effort.
We’re the problem. Don’t you see?
I see that now — it’s all so clear!
It’s our obligation to roll up our sleeves
and redistribute wealth ourselves. We have the
emotional intelligence, the determination, and the
kind of moxie you can only get from being poor.
The rich are far too stifled
to come out of their shells,
so it’s up to us to pry open those
clams and take their pearls from them.
Pearls are, after all, a
deposit of sand and grain.
It’s just a collection of mundane things. Really,
clams are better off without them. Just like the
rich obviously see themselves as people who just
happened to collect a bunch of mundane things
and now have this uncomfortable LUMP of money
that does nothing but create problems for them.
They’re obviously suffering. And they’ve
been trying to tell us. It’s time for us
to buck up and be as empathetic as they say we
are and do them a favour by taking their money.
Don’t you know… the emptier your bank account…
the fuller your heart. And quite frankly,
we’ve been hoarding a fortune of heart.
And so when it comes to us — those
with less than three months savings
in our bank account — it’s time to open
our hearts… and redistribute the love.
Together… we can make it so
no figurative or literal Royal
ever has to suffer neck problems under
the weight of a heavy crown ever again.
Save a rich person’s life.
Redistribute their wealth. Today.